---
layout: article
title:  "WPA 8 Guide - TCSS142"
date:   2018-03-02
categories: development
image:
    teaser: uwt_teaser_image.jpg
    feature: hguide1_tcss.jpg
comments: true
---

I decided to write this post to fill in the blank space before my next article. It will be a long and very involved one, so watch out for it! I'm pretty proud of how it's coming so far. But until then, I thought it would be nice to post a guide for my classmates on our most recent homework problem. *This is related to my Intro to Programming course at UWT (University of Washington - Tacoma)*

I'm also making use of this handy little plugin that comes with Kramdown: A Table of Contents! So if you want to skip to a certain part, here you go.
{% include toc.html %}

For reference, here is the prompt:

<blockquote>

In a small company workers, are working in teams of two people.<br><br>

Here is an example of a list representing four teams in a company:<br><br>

<code>[[Anna,14,Dan,4],[Obi,9,Emi,7],[Pet,12,Mea,6],[Pam,4,Sam,7]]</code> <br><br>
The number next to the name of the employee represents the number of years of experience of the employee. <br><br>

Write a program that asks the user how many teams are working in the company, and then to provide the names and years of experience for individual teams. The entered data should be saved in a two-dimensional list (as you can see above). <br><br>

Then write a program that uses the created list and displays: <br>

<ul>
  <li>The created list of teams</li>
  <li>The individual work teams</li>
  <li>The list of years of experience of individual teams</li>
  <li>The most experienced team(s)</li>
  <li>The list of names of the employees</li>
  <li>The list of experience corresponding with the names of employees</li>
  <li>The name(s) of most experienced employee(s)</li>
  <li>The name(s) of least experienced employee(s)</li>
  <li>The average number of years of experience</li>
</ul>

</blockquote>

#### 1. Getting user input

Because this whole program relies on user input, the first thing we are going to do is ask for some data using Python's `input()` method.

We know from the prompt that we need **3** variables from the user:
1. "*how many teams are working in the company*";
2. "*the names [...] for individual teams*";
3. "*years of experience for individual teams*";

We will refer to these variables as:
1. `tnum` **[some integer value representing # of teams]**
2. `name` **[some string value representing name of an individual team member]**
3. `yoex` **[some integer value representing years of experience of an individual team member]**

Now that we have our variable names squared away, lets assign some data to 'em. Before we head into the program it is important to note that `tnum` is going to have a greater [**scope**](https://users.cs.cf.ac.uk/Dave.Marshall/PERL/node52.html) than `name` or `yoex`. You will see what I mean in a moment, but it is basically because the number of times we assign a new `name` and `yoex` will be dependent on the value of `tnum`.

With  this in mind, we can start programming:<br>
***Disclaimer: Some people will tell you to have your program completely planned out before starting, but I find that it helps to stumble your way through a bit as a beginner.***

```python
tnum = int(input("Enter the # of teams: "))

for i in range(tnum):
  for i in range(2):
    name = input("Name of team member: ")
    yoex = int(input("Years of Experience: "))
```

The above code should be pretty obvious. We let the user assign `tnum` to whatever value and cast that value into an integer. We then use `tnum` as the value for our outer for loop - which means the program will repeat the nested for loop for each team defined by the user. The nested for loop simply runs a constant of `2` times. We do this because we know 1 *team* consists of 2 *team members* (see example output in prompt for proof of this). Each team member must have a name and value representing their years of experiance, which we assign respectively to `name` and `yoex`. Notice that we do *not* cast `name` to int, because it is not an integer value. <br>
If you are having trouble wrapping your head around this, just remind yourself that **each team has 2 team members**, which means that **for each team we must assign our two values** (`name` and `yoex`) **two times**. Our for loop is doing exactly that - running our code 2 times for each team (a 1:2 ratio).

<div class="notice-info">
<b><u><h5 style="margin: 0px; margin-bottom: 6px; text-decoration: underline">Tip</h5></u></b>
<p style="margin: 0px">When you want to know how many times code in a nested for loop will run, just multiply the times the outer for loop runs by the times the inner loop runs. In our for loop, if our outer loop (controlled by <code>tnum</code>) runs <code>3</code> times, then the code inside the inner loop will execute <code>6</code> times (<code>3*2</code>).</p>
</div>

#### 2. Adding input to a 2D list

So we have our input, but right now it doesn't do anything or go anywhere. A quick glance back at the prompt tells us that we must append the data into a **2D List**. If you don't remember what a 2D List is, it's just a list of lists. In this case, we need one *outer* list to contain each of our *inner* lists - of which there will be some value `tnum`. It should be obvious then that each inner list represents `1` team, and should therefore contain `2` value pairs; or `4` total values.<br>
Here is our template: `[ [name, yeox, name, yeox] , [name, yeox, name, yeox] , etc. ]`

Before we dive in, we can help ourselves out by focusing on a couple key points:
* We need an **outer** list to store **inner** lists in.
* We need **inner** lists (representing individual teams) to store our **2 value pairs** (representing team members).

Let us refer to these lists as `t_teams` and `i_team` respectively:

```python
tnum = int(input("Enter the # of teams: "))
t_teams = []

for i in range(tnum):
  i_team = []
  for i in range(2):
    name = input("Name of team member: ")
    i_team.append(name)
    yoex = int(input("Years of Experience: "))
    i_team.append(yoex)
  t_teams.append(i_team)
```

As you can see, the implementation of this isn't too difficult. We create an empty outer list `t_teams` that will store our inner list `i_team`. Notice that `i_team` is defined within the scope of our first for loop, forcing it to re-initialize for every team created (meaning that the information from the last team won't carry over to the next). We then simply add both `name` and `yoex` to `i_team` (we actually do this twice, once for each team member), and then add the populated `i_team` to `t_teams`.

You'll be pleased to know that after this step, we will have completed one part of the program already! Add `print(t_teams)` after your outer for loop and your program should display the list of teams.

**Sample Output**

```
  Enter the # of teams: 2
  Name of team member: Avery
  Years of Experience: 8
  Name of team member: Eli
  Years of Experience: 20
  Name of team member: Lorem
  Years of Experience: 42
  Name of team member: Ipsum
  Years of Experience: 20
  [['Avery', 8, 'Eli', 20], ['Lorem', 42, 'Ipsum', 20]]
```

A bit clustered but we can easily format our output later.

#### 3. Displaying the individual teams

This shouldn't be too difficult to figure out, we simply have to print each list in `t_teams`:

```python
for i in t_teams:
  print(i)
```
Hopefully that makes sense to you, if not just be sure to study Python's for loops.

#### 4. Years of experience for individual teams

<div class="notice-warning">
<p style="margin: 0px">From here on, I will assume that you can figure out for yourself where and how to display your values.</p>
</div>

This may seem difficult at first, but we can make this a lot easier on ourselves by simply adding the team experience to a list as the user creates them. We can achieve this by editing our first for loop:

```python
tnum = int(input("Enter the # of teams: "))
t_teams = []
t_exp = []

for i in range(tnum):
    i_team = []
    i_ex = 0
    for i in range(2):
        name = input("Name of team member: ")
        i_team.append(name)
        yoex = int(input("Years of Experience: "))
        i_ex += yoex
        i_team.append(yoex)
    t_exp.append(i_ex)
    t_teams.append(i_team)
```

This simply adds an accumulator (`i_ex`) into our outer for loop, which will add up the `yoex` of each team member (from each team) for us. At the end, it will append that sum to `t_exp`. This process is very similar to what we did with `i_team` and `t_teams`, except that we are doing addition within our inner for loop.

#### 5. Most experienced team(s)

Keeping the last step in mind, this should also be a fairly trivial feature to add:

```python
#set "target" to value of largest experience
target = max(t_exsp)

for i in range(len(t_exp)):
  if t_exp[i] == target:
    print(t_teams[i])
```

I'll leave it to you as a challenge to figure out what's going on here - it shouldn't be too hard to grasp if you just follow the structure.

#### 6. List of names of employees

This one is very similar to 4; we can simply add the names to a list as we initialize them in our for loop:

```python
tnum = int(input("Enter the # of teams: "))
t_teams = []
t_exp = []
all_names = []


for i in range(tnum):
    i_team = []
    i_ex = 0
    for i in range(2):
        name = input("Name of team member: ")
        all_names.append(name)
        i_team.append(name)
        yoex = int(input("Years of Experience: "))
        i_ex += yoex
        i_team.append(yoex)
    t_exp.append(i_ex)
    t_teams.append(i_team)
```

As you can see, we only had to add two line of code to our for loop this time. This is because we are simply creating a list of all the names, and they do not need to be associated with a specific team. Therefore we can simply make an empty list (`all_names`), and append each name to it.


#### 7. List of individual years of experience

Lets try out a new for loop with some fancy use of `range()`, 'cause why not. You *could* use the same method we've been using, where we edit our initial for loop. But what's the fun in that?!

```python
iexp_list = []
for i in t_teams:
    for j in range(1,len(i),2):
        iexp_list.append(i[j])
```

As usual, I initialize an empty list that we will store our values in. Then I loop over `t_teams` (which is a 2D list, you'll remember), which is really just an outer loop so we can loop over each of our nested lists. The key part of this snippet is the inner for loop:

```python
for j in range(1,len(i),2):
    iexp_list.append(i[j])
```

Lets deconstruct it:

* `range(1, len(i), 2)` is equivalent to (start at 1, go till the last index of each list in t_teams, count by 2's)

  * This is important because we know that `yeox`s are stored at indices 1 and 3 for every nested list. This range function will make the for loop step like this: `1 -> 3 | next loop | 1 -> 3 | next loop (etc.)`.<br>
   Therefore, we are only grabbing the `yeox` values.

* We set `j` to the values defined by `range(1, len(i), 2)`. These `j` values will represent the indices we want to grab (remember it will only ever equal 1 or 3).

* `iexpl_list.append(i[j])` appends the value located at index `j` in the nested list `i`, to our new list `iexp_list`.

It's totally understandable if this confuses you a bit, just run through the process a few times and it should start to make sense. If not, brush up on the `range()` function and for loops, then come back to it.

#### 8/9. Names of most and least experienced employee(s)

I've combined these two because they really are the same process, just *slightly* different. I will show how I did the *most experienced*, and hopefully you will be able to figure out *least experienced* pretty easily after that.

Because we have a list that has each individual's `yeox` (`iexp_list`), our lives become a lot easier. Finding the highest `yeox` is as simple as:

```python
highest_exp = max(iexp_list)
```

Now that we know the value we are searching for, all we have to do is add each name/names to the list associated with that value:

```python
for i in t_teams:
    if i[1] == highest_exp:
        print(i[0])
    if i[3] == highest_exp:
        print(i[2])
```

You'll remember that `name`s are located at indices `0` and `2`, while `yeox`s are located at indices `1` and `3`. The code above makes use of this information; I check to see if either of the `yeox`s for each team are equal to the highest `yeox` (e.g. `i[1] == highest_exp`). If it is, I print the value at the *previous* index, because we know that the `name` associated with the `yeox` is located exactly one index before it.

This second part is really just about remembering how our 2D list is structured. Take a glance back at it if you are having trouble grasping how this particular code works. Otherwise, you should be able to use this same process to display the *least experienced* employee(s)

#### 10. Average years of experience

All that's left is to get the average years of experience. Compared to the past problems, this one should be a breeze (especially since we have `iexp_list`)!

```python
average = sum(iexp_list)/len(iexp_list)
```

It's that easy! Although you might want to `format()` your output when you `print()` it.

<hr>

Hopefully this helped some people out, but even if no one reads it, it's good blogging practice for me. Keep in mind that this is the *long* way of doing things. I did everything the "noob" way to avoid going outside the scope of the course at UWT. I also avoided using any formatting and showing any "structure", so that you have to use your brain a bit rather than just copying all the code. However, a more advanced programmer would do things **very** differently.

I'm going to include a few bonus sections below that I will populate after the homework is due. They will include the full program file following this guide, an "advanced" program file for those interested, and a section for people to show their solutions (**visit the section if you are interested**). I'm waiting 'til after so somebody can't just come in and `ctrl+c` the entire program. If you are interested in any of that, come back to here after class on 03/04/18 and they should be up!

<hr>

#### Program File (Following Guide)
##### Coming Soon

#### Program File (Advanced)
##### Coming Soon

#### Other Student solutions

If you are interested in having your solutions displayed (**and credited!!!**) here, then simply email me your program file at <avghdev@uw.edu> **or** send me a message on Canvas with your program attached. If you have any other questions, or if I have messed something up on this post, please comment below. I will also credit you with any edits I make based on your advice!
